It's been a great year for
Darwin and open source,
starting with Mac OS X shipping
on March 24th,
and we have great contributions and
signed ups for Darwin open source,
and we'll be sharing a lot of these
accolades and the numbers with
you as well throughout the week.
So without further ado,
I'd like to kick it off by introducing
the Director of Core OS Engineering,
Brett Halle.
So good afternoon.
First session after lunch.
Hopefully you guys
won't fall asleep on me.
We have a lot of technical
material in this session,
so we'll try and get over it.
The focus of this session is
to basically give an overview
of what Darwin is all about.
I'm sure you've seen this picture
numerous times just this morning.
Our focus again really is on
that bottom layer of the system.
There's a huge amount of
technology that exists there.
As we talk about it today,
I think it's important to
note that we will use some
terms quite interchangeably.
Darwin is the Core OS of Mac OS X.
We talk a lot about Darwin,
we talk a lot about Mac OS X,
they are the same thing.
They are not two different
piles of technology,
they are one and the same.
From that perspective,
it's important to note that
Darwin is also open source.
As we talk about the open source
aspects of Darwin and the technology,
it's the same pile of code,
the same technology that
ships as part of Mac OS X.
Again, they are one and the same.
So how in the world do you
describe the Core OS or the
operating system of Mac OS X?
Interestingly enough,
it's technology that tends
not to be very visible.
If we're really doing our job well,
you don't really see us.
So you might consider that
we're certainly kind of the
foundation of the system.
We kind of deal with the plumbing
and the piping and the wiring,
if you will,
that holds Mac OS X together.
Again, if we're doing our job well,
you don't see the Core OS.
You as the developers will
interact with it at a very
high degree of interactivity,
but the developers should rarely,
if ever,
be aware that the Core OS is there.
The architecture of Darwin is
very unusual in that we've taken
basically best of class technologies
and brought them together to bring
the base of Mac OS X together.
And there's a number of
different technologies that
we'll talk about in this session.
This technology comes from
a number of different areas:
academia, the open source community,
and certainly some significant
history at Apple and Next.
And there's probably thousands of person
years worth of development and testing
and usage in much of this code base.
We've taken all that technology
and we've again kind of brought it
together in a very unusual combination,
but tuned it toward the customer base and
developer base that's unique to Mac OS X.
So you've certainly heard a lot of
focus around things like UNIX or
certainly the heritage Mac OS.
We've actually brought aspects of these
technologies together to support both
of these environments and to really
focus on our customer base directly.
From that perspective,
there's an awful lot of untapped
potential that exists in the system.
We'll talk a lot about more
of that during the week,
of course.
But in terms of providing the
modern operating system base,
this is it.
This is the base that really
enables all those capabilities.
And because of the
power that exists there,
I think we're enabling you to create
applications that you couldn't do
on previous versions of Mac OS.
From a feature perspective,
you could consider that Darwin or
the Core OS is responsible for the
preemption aspects of the system,
the memory protection.
Basically,
it's responsible for managing and
coordinating the multiple address
spaces that represent the system.
Each of the applications in the system
exists in a separate address space.
It supports the application environments,
provides all that plumbing and
wiring and stuff that allows the
application environments to exist on
the system and to be able to do their,
export their particular brand,
if you will, of memory management and
such up to the application.
The Core OS is inherently
device independent.
And what I mean by that,
and that seems kind of
an obvious statement,
but that we don't actually have
any particular preference to
any I/O or device architecture.
We realize that technology
in the I/O space is evolving
at a fairly furious rate,
and we've tried to make sure
that we have a design that
will enable us to move forward,
and be able to take advantage of the
fact that we make the whole widget,
and to be able to enable new
hardware and new technology together,
new software technology.
It's a very flexible base.
As we talk about the
pieces of the Core OS,
you'll see that they were designed to
support a number of different kinds
of categories of application spaces,
and hardware spaces, and such.
And we've really kind of tried to
leverage that flexibility of the system
to give us a base which we expect
will last for the rest of the system.
the next 10, 20 years.
The CoreOS is also
designed to be scalable,
and you can interpret this
in a couple of key ways.
It's scalable from the
hardware's perspective,
in that we support certainly various
classes of processor architectures,
G3, G4, but also be able to support
multiple processors in a system,
so support for symmetric multiprocessing
from that level of scalability.
The CoreOS is also
designed to be scalable,
and you can interpret this
in a couple of key ways.
It's scalable from the
hardware's perspective,
in that we support certainly various
classes of processor architectures,
G3, G4, but also be able to support
multiple processors in a system,
so support for symmetric multiprocessing
from that level of scalability.
[Transcript missing]
and being an OS,
and things like networking and all that,
there's more Budsworth than you can
imagine that's a part of the system.
So we're going to spend a little bit and
actually do a tour of the Core OS and the
various components that are part of it.
And first of all,
this kind of gives you a bit
of an exploded view of that
Darwin layer of the system,
and there's a number of
pieces that make it up.
We're going to start first by spending
some time in talking about Mach.
Mach is kind of the actual
foundation layer of the system.
It's designed, in fact,
as an OS foundation
and abstraction layer,
if you will.
And it's responsible for
managing the processor and
memory resources of the system.
It's basically the piece of the system
that actually schedules the processor,
a given application or thread in
the system for being able to run.
And it's important to
note that at this very,
very basic level of the system,
the threading is,
the threads are considered to be,
you know,
an essential building block of Mac OS X.
That scheduling and the various
services that go with it are
actually supported all the way down
to the very base of the system.
It's not a tacked on the top concept.
Mach is also responsible for
handling the memory protection,
the memory management, basically,
if you will,
both the processor and memory
resources of the system,
all the VM capabilities and such.
Because Mac keeps everything
abstracted as far as how memory is
concerned and the various address
spaces that exist in the system,
it also has to provide some very key
and basic services so that there's
a way for user level applications
and the kernel to be able to
communicate back and forth together.
And that's done through
something called IPC,
Inter-Process Communication, RPC,
remote procedure calls,
that is a fundamental, again,
key building block of Mach.
And it's the way Mach uses to
be able to communicate with any
other portion of the system.
Mark is inherently policy neutral.
It's, again,
it's designed to be a very much a,
an abstraction layer to the processor
and memory architecture of the system,
and it doesn't actually have any
concept of things like file systems
or I/O or networking or anything,
security policies, things like that.
That's not Mark's job.
It really is designed to be a
very low-level abstraction layer.
The Mach we use in Mac OS X is based on,
for those of you that
follow this technology,
is based on a Mach 3.0 plus a bunch
of stuff that has been added to it
by the various players that have been
participating in its development.
It's derived from a Mach that
was developed at CMU.
Avi Tavenian, of course,
was one of the original team
members of the Mach team at CMU.
But it was taken on by the
OSF Research Institute a number of years.
In fact,
Apple funded a lot of that development
work at the Research Institute.
And when we took it in and
incorporated it as part of Mac OS X,
of course, we've done considerable amount
of work to enhance the 3.0 base
beyond even those starting points.
It, as very much from its original design
point for Mach was to actually be
able to support things like SMP.
And some of the work that was
done in 3.0 and later also,
has architectural support for being
able to deal with various mechanisms
and facilities for supporting real time.
And we'll talk about that a little
bit more and certainly more in the
Kernel session later this week.
The wall is talking to us.
The Mac OS X also has built into it,
because it's responsible for
managing the processor resources,
the capability of supporting
multiple scheduling policies.
For example, built into the Mac OS X is
the ability to schedule,
certainly either kind of the
real-time scheduling or fixed
priority-based scheduling,
or time-sharing-based policy scheduling.
And there's actually the ability to
support other types of scheduling
policies within the system.
Mark also tries to abstract
the mechanisms for being able
to deal with the other half
of the virtual memory system.
So VM certainly,
if you look at the management of memory,
there's the managing the actual,
you know,
parceling out of the address space
that's available for a given application.
But there's also the other aspect of it,
which is what to do when you
try and access more memory
than you actually have.
You have physical RAM installed
in your system for.
And Mark actually interacts with a
number of external interfaces to be
able to support being able to store,
to be able to handle the
backing store for the OS,
either on the file system or,
and certainly is capable of other
kinds of backing storage solutions.
Mark is also, again,
this is kind of repeating here,
but it's very much designed
to be a system that's designed
to be able to handle the OS,
and it's very much designed
to be able to handle the OS.
So, I'm going to go ahead and show
you a little bit of the Mac OS X.
So, it's very much designed
to be very modular.
Mac was intended to have
OS personalities put on top of it.
Again, it's policy neutral.
So, it's, you know, it's interface layer,
it's abstraction layer is assessed,
and it assumes that there's
some other OS and other
OS technologies that sit on it.
And that's very much a key
part of its design space.
Now this is all fine and interesting,
this is all down at the
very base of the system,
but if you're writing an
application for Mac OS X,
what does Mach mean to you?
Well, it's important to note that all
process models of the system,
in other words,
the things that actually kind
of handle the scheduling and
the kind of environment which
your application rests within,
are all fundamentally built
on top of Mach primitives.
Those Mach primitives
are tasks and threads.
And whether you're using Carbon,
or whether you're using Classic,
or you're using Cocoa,
all of those application environments
are fundamentally built on
these particular abstractions.
All memory management is also
built on top of Mach Primitives.
So at the very lowest level again,
there's management of, if you will,
VM objects and the handling of virtual
memory and the paging services.
And at your application,
you're probably dealing with things more
like Malik or other kinds of services,
GetPointer or NewPointer, rather,
depending on the type of
application that you're using.
But fundamentally,
when it gets right down to actually
managing the memory at the OS level,
Mach is responsible.
And again, as I mentioned before,
with Mach built on this concept
of inter-process communication,
that all kernel-to-user,
and user-to-kernel,
and user-to-user communication,
and what I mean by user-to-user is user
space from a more process architecture,
processor architecture perspective.
So that all that communication
that exists in the system
between applications,
and between applications in the OS,
are done,
built on top of these Mach primitives.
Basically, inter-process communication,
RPC, or what you'll end up hearing a lot,
and mentioned in a number
of the documentation,
is Mach ports.
Now to get into this a little
bit more and give you a sense of
exactly how the system actually
uses some of these facilities,
I want to invite Joe Sokol up on stage.
And what we're going to do is
show you that as you're running
the applications on your system,
that there's actually the ability to
look at the system much more from a,
if you will, a systems perspective to see
kind of the impact of your
application at the OS level.
Okay, so many of you are
probably familiar with...
With the applica- with
TOP running on UNIX,
which is capable of showing you a
lot of stuff going on in the system.
What we're going to do here
today is just kind of take a look
at a simple little Carbon app,
because that's kind of the,
a runtime environment that isn't quite
so used to running on top of UNIX.
And to show you that, in fact,
just because it's Carbon, right,
it actually is making use of
a lot of these Mac services.
So you're going to see the
fact that their threads,
their ports,
being allocated on your behalf.
And we're going to take a little
look at some characteristics of
performance or lack of performance
that we'd like you to avoid.
So the little app is called
Wait Next Event Loop.
And the first thing we're going to take
a look at is what it means to have an app
that is basically not only compute bound,
but basically running through--
take a slightly different view
here-- a lot of system calls.
Okay, so the Wait Next Event in the
Carbon Runtime is actually
implemented with a few
Mach calls and a few BSD calls.
But when you amplify that,
if you're just sitting in the loop doing
a Wait Next Event with a zero timeout,
basically you get really,
really busy on the system.
Now this has basically
three bad aspects to it.
The first one is kind of obvious.
In a time-sharing system,
our little test app here,
his priority is diving way down.
And it's going to stay down.
Because he's never blocking.
So you might not like the responsiveness
you get in this app over time.
Secondly,
one that you might not think about
so much is you're keeping a number
of pages hot all the time because
you're constantly executing them.
So those are pages that the
VM system might have been able to,
you know,
steal and actually give to a foreground
application that really needs them.
So it's continuing to put
pressure and competing for memory.
And then the third thing is all of our
The power management is actually driven
and triggered off of our idle loop,
which is an actual Mach thread that gets
run when there's nothing else to run.
So that is where we make the decisions
to put the system into nap or doze
mode to reduce the power consumption.
Not the deep sleep,
but these other modes that allow us
to cut back on power consumption.
The application itself is basically
implementing an idle loop.
That does not allow us to
enter into those modes.
Another thing that we can look
at with TOP is some of the
other resource utilization.
So again,
you can see that this is a very simple,
dumb,
hello world style Carbon application.
And we've managed to allocate
him two threads and 61 ports.
So these are things that are happening
as part of the Carbon runtime model.
So another thing we can show is,
let's go and cut down on the amount of,
let me flip back here real quick, sorry.
This is a little bit easier to see.
In terms of the CPU utilization
and the number of system calls,
we've now simply made the wait
next event wait for one tick.
So instead of it just
being strictly pulled,
even just going to a one tick wait
really reduces the load on the system.
If we go to something that's a
little more approaching infinity,
then of course it goes real quiescent.
So even if you can't construct the app
to be purely an event driven model,
if you have an event loop,
if you can at least make the times
that you're blocking for long,
that really helps in terms of
relieving pressure in the system.
Alright,
so now we want to show a memory leak.
So again,
TOP can be used to see things like
memory leaks going on in the system.
You'll notice under the Rprivate,
which is the resident private column,
that all of a sudden we have
a little plus sign sticking
out there on the right.
And what that's indicating is that
that actually is a growing size there,
so you can see the size going up slowly.
This is basically a
4K leak once a second.
Now if we were to be leaking
every time around that event loop,
we don't really enforce any kind
of real upper limits on the amount
of memory that an app can obtain.
So it is probably a good idea on
your part to watch your app and make
sure that it doesn't have any leaks.
Because over time, maybe the app stays up
for a long period of time,
of course that would
just keep going larger,
going longer and longer.
Growing larger and larger over
that period of time to the
point where you might run out
of paging space on the system.
So an app can approach
3 gigabytes in size.
Thank you, Joe.
All right.
So.
Back to slides here.
So I think it's important to
realize that even though you may
be thinking of your application
in terms of the Carbon API space,
or if you're writing a new app in Cocoa,
that there actually is a lot going
on in the system under the covers,
and that there are actually tools that
you can use to be able to tell what the
actual resource usage and the effects,
if you will, of your application are
on the rest of the system.
If you're interested in learning
more about the Darwin kernel,
there's a session later this week
on Friday that I encourage you to
go to over in the Civic Center.
And this particular session will not
only cover the Mach aspect of the system,
but will also talk quite a bit
about the BSD kernel as well.
Moving on in our tour now
into the I/O Kit space.
I/O Kit is an object-oriented framework
that's basically designed to try and
ease the process for developing and
implementing drivers on Mac OS X.
It has a lot of kind of native
or inherent capabilities that
are part of that framework.
Support for things like plug and
play and dynamic device management.
And of course, again,
those things sound like, you know,
mom and apple pie kinds of things,
but it's very important to note that,
again, from the very basis of the system,
that the I/O system is intended to be
able to support devices that can come
and go as far as the system is concerned.
That the I/O system itself has no
inherent policy in terms of the,
you know,
kind of the arrival or the departure
of given devices on the system.
That policy is actually
managed up much higher,
you know, in the system space.
For example, whether the file system
has a dependency on a,
you know, volume that happens to
exist on a particular disk.
But I/O Kit itself supports the ability
for devices to come and go in the system
and is a very inherent capability.
Another important aspect of
I/O Kit that's really there from the
core is support for power management.
It's that it's expected that all
devices and parts of the system
participate and are involved in the
process of managing power on the system.
And we'll talk a little bit
more about that in a minute.
And as well, I/O Kit is intended to be
very modular and extensible.
We don't know what kind of
devices may appear five,
ten years from now.
And we've tried to make sure that the
basic architecture for I/O Kit can
be very flexible as new I/O and
device technology come on the scene.
In addition to that basic capability,
of course,
I/O Kit does support and provide
the abstractions for all the common,
you know, class of devices that
exist in the system,
things like SCSI and ATA and
USB and stuff like that.
And those are all done through another
aspect of the framework called families,
and we'll talk about
that in a minute as well.
Again, I/O Kit is a framework.
It's actually an
object-oriented framework,
C++ based.
And it provides basically the common
kernel services and facilities for
being able to support I/O in the system.
And it also has the facilities to
be able to enable the communication
from the kernel to the user space,
so that the actual I/O can get
up to where the applications
can take advantage of it.
In many cases, that's done through other
layers of abstraction,
but the inherent capability for being
able to do that is built into I/O Kit.
I/O Kit, in effect,
models the physical world, if you will.
As you think about your computer,
there's a motherboard, and there's chips,
and there's potentially a PCI bridge,
and potentially PCI cards,
and a graphics card,
or a SCSI card that's in there.
And I/O Kit actually is responsible
for being able to develop that model,
if you will, of all those devices.
And then, once it has that model,
being able to actually connect
up the appropriate driver
to that given hardware,
so that the rest of the system
can actually talk to it.
The protocol specifics for any
particular class of devices
is something we call families.
A family basically is, if you will,
a domain appropriate abstraction
for a particular device.
A good example of this is if you would
compare something like SCSI and audio,
they're pretty, very separate,
very radically different approach,
views if you will, on I/O.
You're probably not as interested in
setting the volume of your SCSI disk,
for example.
So the families actually provide the
appropriate API set and capabilities for
that particular kind of device space.
The actual device specifics
themselves exist in drivers.
So that's the part of the system
that directly talks to the hardware.
And they, in and of themselves,
then communicate with the families,
and then the families with
the rest of the system.
As I mentioned, power management is a
very key part of Mac OS X.
You guys were at the keynote
this morning and saw Avi's demo,
and it's really quite amazing to see
something like the titanium effectively
be awake before you can open it.
I've heard a number of refrigerator door
kinds of stories of trying to make sure,
is it really off or not?
But it's because of the architecture
for power management that that
actually becomes possible.
It's integral to the
I/O Kit architecture.
And it's based on this
concept of power planes.
Much like I mentioned that I/O Kit tries
to model the physical world,
from the power management perspective,
there's another model that models kind
of the power distribution in the system.
And they may not correspond
on a one-to-one basis.
Depending on how the
hardware is designed,
the interdependencies at a power
level actually may be different.
But I/O Kit's responsible for
trying to keep that abstraction and
that set of relationships together.
It's important to note that for Mac OS X,
the way we are able to get the speed and
performance out of wakeup is because of
the full architecture of both I/O Kit as
well as the rest of the system.
That the kernel itself is multi-threaded,
the system itself is multi-threaded,
and that the process of waking
up the system is actually done
as much in parallel as possible.
And as a result,
you're able to actually enable
the parts of the system that are
necessary to get that application
up and going as quickly as possible.
As long as it doesn't have
any inherent dependency on,
you know, the disk or a networking device
which may take a little bit
longer to come up to speed,
you're able to get up and
use and interact with your
system at a UI level very,
very quickly.
If you're familiar,
certainly with Mac OS 9, in waking up,
sometimes it can take a pretty
substantially long period of time.
And part of the reason for that is
the fact that the system is very,
very fast.
The system is very serially dependent
on making sure that all those
components actually are fully awake
before you can access any part of it.
In addition, things like AppleTalk,
for example, have to go through the
process of renegotiating.
If you happen to have
AppleTalk enabled on 9,
have to go through the
process of renegotiating node
numbers and such like that,
which end up having to be done
before the system can fully wake up.
On 10, again, because these things
can be done in parallel,
for those parts of the system that aren't
dependent on having to use AppleTalk,
for example, if you have that enabled,
you don't have to wait for that
particular renegotiation to occur
before you can use the system.
From the application perspective,
you probably won't deal
with I/O Kit much directly.
Most of the devices are actually handled
through other layers of abstraction.
Certainly, if you're interested in disks,
chances are the way you're accessing
those disks are through file systems,
or networking through either
your OT interfaces from Carbon,
or from Sockets,
or other network services that may exist.
From the application perspective,
you probably won't deal
with I/O Kit much directly.
Most of the devices are actually handled
through other layers of abstraction.
Certainly, if you're interested in disks,
chances are the way you're
accessing those disks are
through a network service.
Certainly, if you're interested in disks,
chances are the way you're
accessing those disks are
through a network service.
There are a lot of sessions
for I/O Kit this week.
So if you're interested
in various aspects of it,
be it FireWire or USB,
or the storage drivers,
or the basic architecture,
I encourage you to go to that.
And in fact,
immediately after this session,
there's another overview,
because I couldn't possibly get
into enough detail on I/O Kit here.
But I encourage you to go to that session
if you're interested in working either
at the device level or interested in
devices from an application perspective.
Moving on now in our tour to
the BSD portion of the system.
And this is where that power
of UNIX comes into play.
So there's two aspects
that we look at for BSD,
and it helps us kind of
manage the different views and
responsibilities that exist.
The first is the BSD from
the kernel perspective.
And the BSD in the kernel is
one that's based on BSD 4.4,
with a lot of intense integration
that exists between it and
Mach and it and I/O Kit.
So if you look at the kernel
environment for Mac OS X,
it's basically the BSD kernel, I/O Kit,
and Mach are the three key pieces
that make up the kernel environment.
The BSD kernel is what actually
provides the OS personality,
if you will,
APIs and services for the system.
Much like Mac is completely agnostic
as far as the policy is concerned,
BSD's responsibility is actually
to manage the policy of the OS.
So it actually provides the
application process model,
the support for things like
signals and tracking of file
descriptors and things like that.
When your application
dies or gets torn down,
it's BSD's job to make sure
that all those resources are
all reclaimed and handled.
It also is responsible for the
basic security policy of the system.
So, if you will, that's the concept of
multiple users on the system,
or even when you take it down
to the file system level,
being able to manage access to
individual files or pieces of data.
That basic security policy is a very
inherent part of the BSD system.
It's a very important part of the
BSD environment and is enforced,
again, down at the kernel level.
It's also important to note that
both the file systems architecture
and the networking architecture
for Mac OS X basically fit
inside the BSD kernel space.
They are both based on
the BSD implementations.
And we'll talk more about both file
systems and networking in a few minutes.
The system framework is basically how
we try to describe or abstract the
set of interfaces that BSD provides.
And it's basically the system calls and,
if you will, POSIX level interfaces
and BSD system APIs,
if you will, for the system.
If you're accessing things
like porting a BSD application,
this is actually the APIs that
you're most likely will write to.
The application environments
themselves tend to be written
on top of this API set.
The system framework is also responsible
for other kinds of services as well.
Things like Pthreads, the math library,
the basic C libraries.
Basically,
the very low level sort of APIs and
services that you expect to be
able to support an OS environment.
The user environment is kind of another,
if you will, almost a fourth application
environment that exists on the system.
You've probably seen all the
other architectural diagrams,
and they refer to Classic, and Carbon,
and Cocoa, or potentially even Java.
It's important to note that in terms
of the actual system architecture,
there's actually one more,
and it's the BSD user environment.
It's where things like the shells
and command line scripts and
things like that actually run.
It's where a lot of the
network administration client
tools actually execute.
They're things that are kind of common
command line tools and facilities
that come from the BSD community.
It also has a huge number of various
file tools for creating directories and
copying files and that kind of thing,
as well as tools for being able
to kill other processes or top,
like we showed you a few minutes ago.
All these things are available and
exist within the BSD user environment.
It's also where some very key
and important system services
or network administrative
services exist in the system.
Things like NetInfo, DNS services, Bind,
Network Time Protocol Server, System Log,
and things like Apache.
It may be important to
note here that if you,
for example, are running the client
environment and you happen to
turn on personal web sharing,
that it's actually Apache that ends up
getting launched and run on the system.
Probably the single most used
web server on the planet.
But all that stuff
exists behind the scenes.
and it helps support the system.
From a developer's perspective,
it's important to note that you
really want to be kind of aware
of how BSD influences your life.
Certainly, again, it contributes to the
process model of the system.
The support for things like signals
and management of file descriptors
and other important OS resources are
all managed by the BSD process model.
But there's also things like
environment variables and things
like that that are also available,
kind of the standard things you
would expect from a UNIX process.
It's also responsible
for the security policy,
again.
And remember, those will impact the way
your application behaves.
And from that perspective,
you should be aware that
things that you maybe have been
used to doing under Mac OS 9,
you know, that the security policy of
the system actually plays a
significant role here under Mac OS X.
Whether or not you can access
certain files and places that
you can write into the system,
things like that.
It's also important to
step back a bit from that,
from the application perspective,
and look at BSD from the
developer perspective.
There are a ton of tools that
exist in this environment.
Now certainly we'd try
and discourage the BSD,
kind of, UNIX user experience for
our typical end users,
but from a developer perspective,
this is an incredibly
powerful part of the system.
As you saw with Top,
there's ways to actually look at the
system kind of from behind the scenes.
This particular setup we had was
actually two systems we telneted
into the system that was running
the application to run Top,
so we could observe it without
impacting the UI in any particular way.
Kind of being able to
put instrument probes,
if you will, on the system.
But there's a huge number of other
tools that are available there that
might help building your applications,
or just managing your
development resources.
and the environment that you work in.
In porting UNIX applications to Mac OS X,
it's important to note that there's a
lot of options that are available here.
Later this week,
there'll be a session that'll
actually show you a couple of
ways that you can approach this.
If you happen to have your favorite
UNIX tools or other things that
you might want to use on Mac OS X,
porting them over to X is
actually fairly straightforward.
In fact, you can actually use a kind of a
stepping stone approach to getting
applications on the Mac OS X.
If you happen to have
one that even has a GUI,
there's a third-party X Windows server,
for example, that's available.
So if you want to port over an
X-based application and get that
up and running very quickly,
and then spend the time to actually
wrap it in something like Cocoa to
replace it with a more aqua-friendly,
more user-friendly application.
That's a user-friendly experience
that ends up being a very easy
thing to do under Mac OS X.
It's also interesting to note
that it's also very possible,
and something we actually
do a lot ourselves,
of being able to use UNIX tools
from within a GUI application.
Many of our control panels, for example,
are actually, you know,
execute command line
tools in the background.
They actually, you know,
are able to launch and interact with
a UNIX command line application.
So you can actually use that in a
very easy command line environment.
Again,
that's completely hidden from the user.
Apache is an excellent example of that.
If you go out and get an Apache manual
of how to do full system administration,
there's some pretty thick books out
there for administrating the various
configuration files and stuff.
Your user should never
have to deal with that,
and it's possible to actually wrap
that kind of power in something
that's very easy for them to use.
There's a number of sessions
also that are related to the
BSD aspect of the system.
Leveraging BSD services
later part of the week,
we'll actually go through and
demo porting some UNIX tools and
wrapping them in a Cocoa application.
But there's also a couple of
other important sessions as well.
Threading on Mac OS X,
and I will talk about the Pthreads and
some of the other threading options
that you have available on the system.
And as well, support for directory
services and such on Mac OS X.
Moving on now to File Systems.
Whoops, sorry about that.
File Systems, of course,
is a lot more complex than just
this little blob on the diagram.
It's actually a lot of very,
very broad range of file systems
that are supported within the system.
And this is all based on basically
the BSD file system architecture.
It's important to note that the
file system's implementation is
part of the BSD kernel environment,
and it's based on the VFS design.
If you go out and get your
favorite BSD UNIX text,
it actually is a great reference
for being able to learn
about the VFS architecture.
But it's basically a stackable
virtual file system model,
which we've extended both from
the basic POSIX interfaces,
beyond that, to be able to support more
rich file systems such as HFS+.
It can support virtually any
kind of file system type.
In fact, on Mac OS X,
we support a huge number
of file system types today.
And there are third parties
that are also been making file
system services available.
Recently,
I read that the Andrew file system,
for example,
has been ported now to Mac OS X.
We've also extended those file
system interfaces to be able
to take advantage of Unicode.
So you'll find that there are
UTF-8 interfaces available so that
you can be able to take advantage
of localized file names and such.
But it's also really important to note
that from a way we've designed Mac OS X,
much like how we've
approached the I/O system,
that we have no particular file
system affinity at the OS level.
In that we don't particularly
care whether or not it's
HFS+, whether it's UFS.
We are intentionally trying to design
the architecture of the system so that
it can be flexible across a number of
different file system architectures.
As you move up the application chain,
more of those high level services
and capabilities are exported
through your applications.
The file system is responsible
for enforcing the file system
security policy of the system.
Again, unlike Mac OS 9 in this respect,
there's a concept of security
that does exist in the system.
Your ability to write to a given file,
rename, even execute privileges all exist
and are enforced by the file system.
There's a concept of users and
groups that is throughout the system,
and the access control is all
managed by this aspect of the system.
The application environments themselves
tend to provide the abstracted level
of interfaces that you'll tend to use.
If you're writing a Carbon app,
you're using the file manager,
and things like resource forks and
things like that are fairly fluidly
part of that particular environment.
If you're writing in Cocoa,
you're going to be using
something like NSFile,
and where the use of resource forks
is not the typical way of writing
an application in this space.
Or if you're porting a BSD application,
you'll end up using the POSIX plugin.
plus plus APIs.
And what I mean by the POSIX++ is
just the POSIX plus the extensions
that we've provided for Mac OS X.
Now to talk a little bit more,
give you a better idea of
what the implications are of
file systems in the system,
has Joe to come back up again?
And again, much like Mach,
where there's a lot going on behind
the scenes on your application,
the same is true for file systems.
Okay, so we're going to talk a little
bit about a tool called FS Usage.
Let me get the top out of the way here.
That basically is something that
you're probably not familiar with.
I don't believe it shows
up on other UNIX systems.
It's something that we developed here.
But it will give you a comprehensive
list of all the files and
directories being touched,
and the size of the
I/Os that are going on,
the amount of time that you're
waiting for that I/O to complete.
There's also on the far left there,
you can see a current clock
with millisecond precision.
And then the name of the task that's
actually causing the I/Os to occur.
So it's both comprehensive,
both in kind of a global manner
if you're looking at the,
basically allowing to look at all of the
tasks that are running in the system.
Or you can focus it in
on a particular task.
But I find it more interesting to look
at it with more of the global method.
Just because there are lots of things
that are happening on the system that
you trigger when the application does
something that you might not be aware of.
Because a lot of the services
are tied in directly to some
of these higher level calls.
It's useful for exposing
redundancies of access.
Pretty obvious.
And as I alluded to earlier,
it can show you where your app
is blocking or waiting for I/Os.
So if the app feels sluggish,
you can use this tool to determine
whether or not it's doing something.
It's due to lots of wait time for I/Os.
And it'll even show you where
you're waiting for synchronous
page ins to complete.
So where the app's trying to page
fault some of its code in or its data.
And then one other interesting aspect,
which you can,
I would suggest reading the man page
so you can see how to turn this on.
But there's a little back door trap
that basically enables the display
of the higher level Carbon calls.
So for you Carbon developers out there
who are curious as to what system calls,
what Unix system calls we turn
a lot of these higher level
Carbon file manager calls into.
FS usage will show you that.
It will actually show you
the encompassing or the calls
being encompassed by these
various higher level calls.
So we do something like open the.
[Transcript missing]
So again, it's worth noting here that
for much of the things that are
going on in your applications,
that down deep underneath
that application,
there's a lot of OS facilities in
play to make those things possible.
And there are a lot of very powerful and
useful tools on Mac OS X that you can
take advantage of to be able to see the
system from this kind of perspective.
If you're interested in learning
more about the file system,
there's a whole session on that as
well on Wednesday in the morning.
I encourage you to go to that.
Clark is always quite entertaining.
Moving on in our tour now to networking.
For networking on the Mac OS X, again,
networking is part of the
BSD kernel environment.
And it's based on the,
as Avi put this morning,
the kind of network, the reference stack,
if you will,
for IP in the internet world.
We're based on the 4/4 TCP/IP stack,
which we've actually
synced up with FreeBSD 3.2.
And this is a Sockets
API based environment.
It comes with quite a lot of
powerful capabilities built
into the networking stack.
Certainly support for
things like multi-homing,
and routing, and firewall,
and network address translation,
or NAT mechanisms.
These are all pretty basic services
that exist in our networking stack.
Another very key one, however,
is this concept of auto-configuration.
And again, Avi touched on that in
the keynote this morning.
But it's a very important part of
our architecture and a key part of
foundation that we're working on
as we move forward with Mac OS X.
For the networking environment,
the way that you actually
go about extending that is
through something we call NKEs,
or Network Kernel Extensions.
There's basically a model that
we've developed for being able to
extend or enhance the capabilities
of our networking stack.
Much like you can create drivers
for a given piece of hardware,
or you can write a file system
kernel extension for being able to
support new and exotic file systems,
there's also ways for you to be able to
extend the networking aspect of Mac OS X.
One important part of the
architecture for our networking is
actually how we support Classic.
And a very key part of that architecture
of the system is to be able to support so
that the virtual environments above us,
for example, like Classic,
or maybe something like a
virtual PC-like environment,
can actually share the core networking
services and configuration and setup.
So it's not necessary to have
multiple IP addresses for each virtual
environment that exists on the system.
We also support access of networking
through an open transport layer that
exists for porting Carbon applications.
Things like Internet Explorer and
things like that all use the open
transport services that we provide
as Carbon as a way to get their
app over quickly onto Mac OS X.
We also support PPP and PPP over Ethernet
as key services that exist in Mac OS X.
And PPPoE is something
that's new for Mac OS.
The ability to be able to
inherently be able to connect to
your DSL or cable modem provider.
Also built into Mac OS X is
the support for DHCP,
both the client and server.
So this is actually used in
different situations depending
on how Mac OS X is set up.
Certainly as a full server environment,
you can administrate and manage
DHCP for things like Netboot and stuff.
But it's also used for being
able to do ad-hoc networking.
Also built into Mac OS X is
the support for DHCP,
both the client and server.
So this is actually used in
different situations depending
on how Mac OS X is set up.
But it's also used for being
able to do ad-hoc networking.
Mobility is a very key part of the
direction of our networking architecture.
Networking under Mac OS X is already
incredibly rich and powerful through
the multi-homing and other aspects,
but one area that has not been
historically been well known
in UNIX networking is the
ability to deal with mobility.
And that's something that we
consider to be very critical.
So we've actually spent quite
a bit of time developing a
very flexible architecture for
being able to handle mobility,
be able to support things like
automatic network configuration,
being able to deal both configuration
and reconfiguration based on the
link level detection that exists.
So if you have a portable and you
unplug that cable out of the back,
it'll automatically notice the
fact that you've removed the cable,
and if you have an airport,
it'll automatically and silently
convert over completely to
be able to use the airport if
you're using DHCP configuration.
And all of this support is very dynamic.
[Transcript missing]
But another key aspect of
it is the ability to support
application level notification.
Our mail program is the
first example of this use,
where an application can
actually be aware of the ability
of network connectivity and
accessibility to the network.
So if you actually have had
a chance to play with mail,
if you remove the cable out of
the back of your system or lose
connectivity to the internet,
mail will automatically go offline.
It detects the fact that you
no longer have a connection
and does the right thing.
And when you plug it back in, again,
it will automatically be involved
in the process of reconfiguring
itself and reconnecting it
to the appropriate servers.
And this is the kind of behavior
we'd like to see as we move on
and move forward with Mac OS X.
Mm-hmm.
There are a number of sessions
for networking this week.
Networking Overview exists tomorrow,
and a number of other
networking sessions tomorrow,
both the Kernel
extensions for networking,
as well as the Configuration and
Mobility session as well tomorrow.
And then there's a feedback
form later this week.
So take a little side trip here and
talk about how the Core OS and G4
architecture actually play together.
This is certainly kind of outside
of the architectural space
of thinking of the Core OS,
but it's an important part and
impacts actually our design space for
Mac OS X in terms of how we get some
incredible performance on the system.
First and foremost, of course,
is support for the Velocity Engine for
all the AlteVec unit of the processor.
And there's a number of libraries
that are available on Mac OS X.
There's a VDSP library,
which is responsible for basically signal
processing and fast Fourier transforms
and convolutions and things like that.
And that library has
existed on Mac OS 9.1,
but is also available on Mac OS X.
New for Mac OS X, however,
is a new library called VBLAS,
the Vector Basic Linear
Algebra Subroutines,
which basically handle support for
things like large matrix manipulation.
Basically, this kind of thing is
used to control the VBLAS.
This kind of thing is used for
things like MP3 coding and decoding,
MPEG,
speech recognition and image processing.
Those are common places where this
kind of library would be used.
And this particular service
is only available on Mac OS X.
It's important to note that from
this library on a 500 MHz G4,
this is where we get some of the
really amazing performance numbers
that are possible because of the G4s.
2.2 Giga Flops of performance.
Again,
this kind of stuff is used in things
like iTunes and stuff like that.
There's also a number of other
vector libraries that are available.
Math, the VMathlib,
which is basically a basic math
library that's been AltaVec tuned.
Vector Operations and BasicOps,
which is kind of an extension
to the basic instruction set,
if you will, for the velocity engine.
And Bignum, which is a sports,
basically large, VLT engine.
And that's where we get
the most performance.
you know, 10, 24-bit multiplies,
that kind of thing.
The other aspect of the G4 worth noting,
and how it plays with
Mac OS X and the Core OS,
is in multiprocessors.
Mac OS X inherently supports true SMP.
This is really
differentiated from Mac OS 9,
whereas if you have an application,
and you happen to have it on an MP box,
then unless you've specifically written
your application to use the MP API,
you won't actually benefit
from any significant degree
by having an MP system.
The Mac OS X is very different in that
the system itself takes advantage of
the processors that are available,
and scales automatically.
Each thread in the system is capable
of running on a separate processor.
Again, Mach at the very lowest levels
of the system is the part of the
system responsible for handling the
scheduling and processor management,
and will automatically make
sure that each thread on the
system runs on whatever processor
resources are available.
This means if you have a single
application with multiple threads,
each of those threads might actually
run on a different processor.
And that's really important to note,
because that really tends to be a
great way of finding situations where
you may not necessarily be doing your
multithreading in the best possible way,
and doing the locking and
things that need to occur.
I encourage,
if you have a multithreaded application,
that you find a way to test
and run it on an MP system.
If you're using,
and tend to want to be able
to take advantage of that,
there's a number of ways through the
different application environments,
that take advantage of it.
Certainly the MP APIs for Carbon,
an interesting enough classic,
as well as NSThread for Cocoa,
and the Pthreads package
for BSD applications.
So there's a number of abstractions
that you can use to be able to
take advantage of multiple threads.
It's important also to note
kind of how the system itself
deals with MP on the system.
Again,
Mach is designed very much from the
beginning to take advantage of the
multiple processors and to be able
to deal with things like threads.
UNIX is not quite as
evolved in the same way.
From its heritage,
it's actually designed to run more
on uniprocessor-based systems.
We've done quite a bit of work to be
able to take advantage of MP on Mac OS X,
and we'll be doing a lot
more as time progresses.
But it's important that if you're
actually doing work on Mac OS X that
you know that the BSD environment
and how it manages itself across
multiple processors is a key part
of how the system is designed.
I encourage you to go to the session
later this week where there's more
discussion on this particular issue.
Particularly if you're doing
file systems and networking,
you'll find that there's this concept of
funnels that are involved for managing
what parts of the system are running.
system actually are involved
and run on which processors.
Since we're talking about
things in the kernel,
there's this concept that I've used a
number of times now of kernel extensions.
And basically, these are modules of code,
if you will, code fragments that allow,
if you will,
a plug-in model for the kernel.
Allows things like drivers and
network kernel extensions and file
system plug-ins to actually be loaded
and managed as part of Mac OS X.
Really important thing to note that
a Mac OS X kernel extension is not
the same as a Mac OS 9 extension.
We have very explicit usage models for
these particular kinds of extensions.
If you're doing a driver,
or you need to be able to
create a new file system,
this is the place that you
would use a Mac OS X extension.
Many things that were used,
that were extensions in a
Mac OS 9 are not appropriate to
be done as a kernel extension.
You really should only
do them if you have to.
It basically is the plug-in
model for the kernel.
And we try and keep the
structure of these things much
like an application bundle,
in the sense that we have bundles that
have property lists and the binaries
for the actual thing that gets loaded.
And there's tools and stuff for loading
and unloading these things in the system.
As well as some common APIs and
things that are supported for this.
The other APIs, however,
beyond the basic loading and
initialize and finalize capabilities,
are all actual APIs that
are very domain specific.
That's why I said this is really not a
general mechanism for extending Mac OS X.
It's really only used for things
like drivers and file system
plugins and networking services.
When you're developing inside the kernel,
should you be one of these people
writing a kernel extension,
it's really important to note
that the rules change a bit.
One, you tend to have to deal
with things through a two
system debugging environment,
two machine debugging.
The language features that
you have available are much,
much more limited.
We don't support
Objective C in the kernel.
That C++ that exists there is
actually a very strict subset
of the full C++ standard,
so there are things like multiple
inheritance and exceptions and
things like that are not the kind
of thing that we really encourage
or in some cases even support.
Obviously,
when you're down at the kernel level,
there is no direct user interaction.
Some cases you're at interrupt level,
you certainly aren't going to be able
to talk to the user at that point.
You don't have access
to things like Aqua.
There are interesting logging tools
and other things that you can use so
that you can get information to you
while you're writing your applications,
but it's definitely not a
user interaction solution.
Resources in the kernel are
considerably more costly here.
When you're dealing with an application,
if it allocates memory,
even if you run out of the
available physical memory,
the OS itself will, you know,
through VM and through backing storage,
will do its best to try and
support your application.
If you're in the kernel
and you use lots of memory,
you're stealing away actual physical
RAM from the rest of the system,
and it's very expensive.
So if you're writing in
this particular space,
you should always use the least
amount that you possibly can.
Failures in the kernel are fatal.
Obviously,
one of the reasons we want to discourage
development of things like kernel
extensions is this is one area where you
can introduce instability in the system.
If you have a driver that goes wild,
you can just as easily crash it.
You can crash the system that
way as you can under Mac OS 9.
So that's why there are very
explicit cases where we support
extension of the kernel,
but we discourage all other types
of extensions from this level.
Moving on to the open
source aspect of Darwin,
I think it's important to note again that
virtually all of the components that are
available in the Core OS are open source.
A couple of very rare exceptions,
things like some of the drivers that
are licensed from third parties,
things like that.
And that we actually very actively
are involved in actually feeding
code back to our upstream providers.
So it's not a,
we've just taken code from the
community and have integrated it
in and are just running with it.
We actually work for things like
BSD and Apache and other things that
if we find bug fixes or other things,
that we actually feed those
fixes back to the BSD community,
their Apache community,
or other providers.
We are actually very actively trying
to make sure that there's a community
involvement here in open source.
Excuse me.
And that's important that this
community is very cooperative.
For example,
things like security fixes that come in.
Some of the patches that were part
of some recent software updates
were actually fixes that came in
from the external community that we
rolled into these software updates.
Or even platform fixes.
We ended up getting from one
of the bug reports that was
submitted to our support group,
actually included a bug fix right
in as part of the submission.
So it's really important to note
from a perspective of open source,
this is something we take very seriously.
It's not an experiment.
It's very much a part of how
we do business in the Core OS.
And that our developers are involved
in the mailing list in the community to
actively make this a two-way process.
And that you as developers can
actively participate in this process.
It's important to note again that our
repositories and things like that,
actually many of them are
outside Apple's firewall.
That we actually have people
outside of Apple that do not,
are not under our payroll,
don't work for us,
who actually have commit
access to these repositories.
That people can actually be involved
in the process of developing and
involving the Darwin codebase.
There's a couple of sessions
later this week that I encourage
you to participate in.
One is the Open Source at
Apple on Wednesday,
talking a little bit more about
Darwin from an open source perspective
and other open source projects,
as well as a Birds of a Feather
session tomorrow evening.
And finally,
I'd like to give you a handful
of things to think about as
you kind of go from this point,
hopefully off to all
these other sessions.
One is that,
You know, it's our intention,
even though we have all
this power under the hood,
that the user experience of UNIX is
something that we really want to hide.
The goal is not to make Emacs
the ideal user interface.
From our perspective,
this is really an optional environment
for power users and developers.
This should not be the
typical behavior of Mac OS X.
But this is something that you as
developers should take advantage of.
But always keep in mind,
and I'll give you some examples
of how we've actually evolved
the system in this way,
is that the concept of root under
Mac OS X is something that we've
really tried to move away from.
It's possible to actually set up your
system so that you have a root user,
but you have to go to some work,
and you have to really know
what you're doing in advance.
But this is part of the model that
we've tried to apply as Mac OS X,
is how to provide as much power as a
UNIX-based environment can possibly have,
without having to create
end users that are heavy.
to be knowledgeable UNIX administrators.
Be careful that you
don't repeat bad habits.
Under Mac OS X,
there's a lot of different
ways to approach things,
and you can probably solve
virtually any problem you have
with the mechanisms that are there,
but think about them before you do it.
Don't just jump into the only
way you can solve a problem
is by using shared memory,
because you end up recreating the
same set of problems of stability
that have existed in the past.
There are other ways to be able to
communicate between multiple applications
that are running on the system.
Shared memory, for example,
should be avoided.
And it's really important
to look at the system,
you know, to have a very systems view
when you're writing your apps.
Tools like what we showed with Top and
FSUsers and stuff allows you to get a
sense of how your application actually
impacts the rest of the system.
There's a lot of other threads
and processes and things that
are running on the computer.
And in order to be able to make
sure that the system behaves
well with local applications,
you need to have a system that is able to
communicate with multiple applications.
And if you're able to do that,
and you're able to do it well with
lots of different things occurring,
you need to take a few minutes and
actually look and to see how your
application affects the system.
Always use the highest level
of abstraction possible.
Again, there usually are very
appropriate services to use,
either the Carbon level or
the Cocoa level or whatever,
and that you should only get involved
in using BSD services or mock-level
APIs or services if that's the
only way to solve a given problem.
Don't just jump right
in and use VM Allocate,
for example, for doing memory management.
There usually are a lot of other
things in the abstraction layers
that exist that are helping to
manage those resources and make sure
that they are handled appropriately.
And remember that open source
is an incredibly powerful tool.
This is something that we're doing
which we think is pretty novel in
terms of adopting open source in a
very big way as part of the major
aspect of the product that we sell.
Again, this is not a little
interesting side project.
Steve put it very clearly,
we're betting Apple very much
on the success of Mac OS X,
and open source is a very key part
of the lower portion of that system.
Get involved in it,
help participate in it.
There's a lot of email lists
and ability to actually
contribute code and other things.
Help make the system better.
And also remember that
there's an incredible amount
of power that exists here.
One of the big changes between
Mac OS 9 and 10 is this introduction
of a modern operating system.
Well,
this is that modern operating system.
The ability to do threading,
and being able to do lots
of things in parallel,
and things in the background,
important leverage UNIX applications,
and multiple application environments.
And so this is all an incredibly
powerful aspect of Mac OS X,
and something that you
want to think about,
because I think it will enable
you to take that next big step.
And lastly, I want to remind people that
there is a feedback forum.
We'd love to hear your
comments on Darwin and things,
ways that you think
we can make it better.
So I encourage you to come to the,
if you're here at the
last part of the session,
5 o'clock on Friday, we'll be here.